Software architecture and design of the web services 
facilitating climate model diagnostic analysis
Lei Pan, Seungwon Lee, Chengxing Zhai, Benyang Tang, Darren Dao, Jonathan Jiang, Jia Zhang, Wei Wang, and Qihao Bao 

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology

Climate model diagnostic analysis is a computationally- and data-intensive task
because it involves multiple numerical model outputs and satellite observation
data that can both be high resolution. We have built an online tool that
facilitates this process. The tool is called Climate Model Diagnostic Analyzer
(CMDA). It employs the web service technology and provides a web-based user
interface. The benefits of these choices include: (1) No installation of
any software other than a browser, hence it is platform compatable; (2) Co-location 
of computation and big data on the server side, and small results and plots
to be downloaded on the client side, hence high data efficiency; 
(3) multi-threaded implementation to achieve parallel performance on multi-core
servers; and (4) cloud deployment so each user has a dedicated virtual machine.

In this presentation, we will focus on the computer science aspects of this tool, 
namely the architectural design, the infrastructure of the web services, the
implementation of the web-based user interface, the mechanism of provenance 
collection, the approach to virtualization, and the Amazon Cloud deployment. 
As an example, We will describe our methodology to transform an existing 
science application code into a web service using a Python wrapper interface 
and Python web service frameworks (i.e., Flask, Gunicorn, and Tornado).
Another example is the use of Docker, a light-weight virtualization container,
to distribute and deploy CMDA onto an Amazon EC2 instance.

Our tool of CMDA has been successfully used in the 2014 Summer School hosted
by the JPL Center for Climate Science. Students had positive feedbacks in
general and we will report their comments. An enhanced version of CMDA with
several new features, some requested by the 2014 students, will be used in 
the 2015 Summer School soon.

